Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the antidiabetic drugs.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the antidiabetic drugs. Begin with the physiology they act upon and
the aims of treatment.
Blood glucose is regulated chiefly by the pancreatic hormones: insulin,
from the beta cells, lowers glucose by promoting its uptake into muscle and fat and
its storage as glycogen and by suppressing hepatic glucose output; glucagon,
from the alpha cells, raises glucose by stimulating glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis.
In type one diabetes there is an absolute deficiency of insulin from autoimmune
destruction of the beta cells, requiring insulin replacement;
in type two there is insulin resistance with relative deficiency,
treated initially with drugs that improve sensitivity or augment secretion,
and later with insulin.
The aims of treatment are to control glucose to prevent the long-term microvascular
and macrovascular complications, while avoiding hypoglycaemia, and,
perioperatively, to maintain safe glucose control through the fasting and stress of
surgery.
So the antidiabetic drugs act on this insulin-glucagon system,
replacing or augmenting insulin or improving its action,
to control glucose while avoiding hypoglycaemia,
the perioperative aim being safe control during fasting and surgical stress.
Describe insulin and its preparations.
Insulin is the hormone that lowers blood glucose,
given by injection as replacement in type one and advanced type two diabetes.
Its preparations are classified by their speed and duration of action.
The rapid-acting analogues — aspart,
lispro and glulisine — act within minutes for mealtime control.
Soluble, or regular, insulin is short-acting.
The intermediate-acting isophane, or NPH,
insulin and the long-acting analogues — glargine,
detemir and degludec — provide background, basal cover,
the longest lasting over a day or more. Premixed preparations combine a rapid and a
longer component.
Regimens range from twice-daily mixtures to a basal-bolus regimen mimicking
physiological secretion, and insulin pumps deliver a continuous subcutaneous
infusion. Soluble insulin is also given intravenously,
as in a variable-rate infusion.
So insulin preparations span rapid, short, intermediate and long-acting forms,
combined in regimens to reproduce physiological secretion,
with soluble insulin used intravenously for acute and perioperative control.
Describe metformin.
Metformin is a biguanide and the first-line oral drug for type two diabetes.
It lowers glucose principally by reducing hepatic gluconeogenesis,
and it improves insulin sensitivity and reduces intestinal glucose absorption,
acting partly through activation of the enzyme AMP-activated protein kinase.
Importantly, it does not stimulate insulin secretion,
so used alone it does not cause hypoglycaemia,
and it is weight-neutral or favourable, with cardiovascular benefit.
Its common adverse effects are gastrointestinal — nausea,
diarrhoea and abdominal discomfort.
Its serious but rare adverse effect is lactic acidosis,
occurring when the drug accumulates in renal impairment or in states of tissue
hypoxia, so it is contraindicated in significant renal impairment and withheld
around the use of iodinated contrast and in acute illness.
So metformin reduces hepatic glucose production and improves insulin sensitivity
without causing hypoglycaemia, limited by gastrointestinal effects and the rare
risk of lactic acidosis in renal impairment and hypoxic states.
Describe the sulphonylureas.
The sulphonylureas — such as gliclazide and glimepiride — lower glucose by
stimulating insulin secretion from the pancreatic beta cells.
They act by binding to and closing the ATP-sensitive potassium channel on the
beta-cell membrane, which depolarises the cell,
opens voltage-gated calcium channels, and triggers insulin release,
mimicking the effect of glucose.
Because they augment insulin secretion regardless of the glucose level,
their principal adverse effect is hypoglycaemia, which can be prolonged and severe,
particularly with the longer-acting agents, in the elderly and in renal impairment,
and they cause weight gain.
They are effective oral agents but require a functioning beta-cell mass.
Perioperatively they are usually withheld on the day of surgery because of the
hypoglycaemia risk during fasting.
So the sulphonylureas stimulate insulin release by closing the beta-cell
ATP-sensitive potassium channel, effective but causing hypoglycaemia and weight
gain, and are withheld on the day of surgery.
Describe the incretin-based therapies — the DPP-4 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists.
These exploit the incretin system, in which gut hormones such as glucagon-like
peptide-one are released after eating to stimulate insulin and suppress glucagon in
a glucose-dependent manner.
The dipeptidyl-peptidase-four inhibitors, the gliptins such as sitagliptin,
block the enzyme that degrades the incretins, so prolonging their action;
they lower glucose modestly, are weight-neutral and carry little hypoglycaemia risk.
The glucagon-like-peptide-one receptor agonists,
such as semaglutide and liraglutide, are injectable, or now oral,
agents that directly stimulate the receptor, producing greater glucose lowering,
marked weight loss — for which they are now widely used — and cardiovascular
benefit, with little hypoglycaemia.
Their relevant adverse effect for anaesthesia is that they delay gastric emptying,
raising the aspiration risk, so they may need withholding before surgery.
So the incretin therapies augment the glucose-dependent insulin response — the
gliptins by inhibiting incretin breakdown,
the agonists by direct stimulation — the agonists also causing weight loss and
delayed gastric emptying of perioperative importance.
Describe the SGLT2 inhibitors and the thiazolidinediones.
The sodium-glucose cotransporter-two inhibitors — the gliflozins,
such as empagliflozin and dapagliflozin — block the reabsorption of filtered
glucose in the proximal renal tubule,
causing glucose and sodium to be excreted in the urine,
lowering blood glucose with weight loss and a diuretic effect,
and importantly with major benefits in heart failure and chronic kidney disease
shown in large trials.
Their key perioperative concern is the risk of euglycaemic diabetic ketoacidosis —
ketoacidosis without marked hyperglycaemia,
easily missed — precipitated by fasting and surgical stress,
so they are withheld for some days before surgery.
The thiazolidinediones, such as pioglitazone,
act on the nuclear PPAR-gamma receptor to improve insulin sensitivity,
but cause fluid retention, weight gain, a risk of heart failure and of fractures,
limiting their use.
So the SGLT2 inhibitors cause glycosuric glucose lowering with cardiorenal benefit
but the risk of euglycaemic ketoacidosis requiring preoperative withholding,
and the thiazolidinediones improve insulin sensitivity but cause fluid retention
and heart-failure risk.
How would you manage the diabetic patient's medications around surgery?
I would aim to maintain safe glucose control through fasting and surgical stress,
individualising to the patient, the diabetes type,
and the magnitude and timing of surgery, following established guidelines.
For minor surgery with a short fast in a well-controlled patient,
I would manipulate the usual medications — omitting the sulphonylurea and the SGLT2
inhibitor, often continuing or reducing other agents and basal insulin — and
monitor the capillary glucose.
For major surgery, prolonged fasting, or poor control,
I would use a variable-rate intravenous insulin infusion with substrate,
adjusting the patient's long-acting background insulin and stopping the
short-acting and oral agents.
Metformin is usually continued for short procedures but withheld where renal
impairment or contrast is involved,
and the SGLT2 inhibitors are withheld for some days beforehand.
So perioperative management maintains control by manipulating oral agents and
insulin for minor surgery and using a variable-rate insulin infusion for major
surgery, with specific withholding of sulphonylureas and SGLT2 inhibitors and
caution with metformin.
How is hypoglycaemia recognised and treated?
Hypoglycaemia, a blood glucose below around four millimoles per litre,
is the most immediate danger of diabetes treatment,
particularly with insulin and sulphonylureas,
and is dangerous because the brain depends on glucose.
It presents first with autonomic features — sweating, tremor, palpitations,
hunger — from the sympathetic response,
and then with neuroglycopenic features — confusion, altered behaviour, drowsiness,
seizures and coma — as the brain is deprived;
these warning signs may be blunted in long-standing diabetes, by beta-blockers,
and under anaesthesia, where it is easily missed, so glucose is monitored.
Treatment is the prompt administration of glucose — oral fast-acting carbohydrate
in the conscious patient, and intravenous glucose,
or intramuscular glucagon if no access,
in the unconscious — with rechecking and further treatment.
So hypoglycaemia presents with autonomic then neuroglycopenic features,
masked under anaesthesia, and is treated promptly with glucose,
intravenously or by glucagon if the patient cannot take it orally,
the warning of monitoring being essential perioperatively.
Outline the principles of managing diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a medical emergency of absolute insulin deficiency,
with hyperglycaemia, ketosis and a metabolic acidosis,
often precipitated by infection or missed insulin, and presenting with dehydration,
vomiting, abdominal pain, Kussmaul breathing and a reduced conscious level.
Management addresses the major problems in order.
First, fluid resuscitation with intravenous crystalloid to correct the substantial
dehydration.
Second, a fixed-rate intravenous insulin infusion to switch off ketogenesis and
lower the glucose, continued until the ketosis resolves.
Third, careful potassium replacement,
because total-body potassium is depleted and insulin drives potassium into cells,
so the level falls rapidly and must be monitored and replaced.
The precipitant is treated, glucose is added to the fluids once it falls to avoid
hypoglycaemia, and the patient is monitored closely.
So diabetic ketoacidosis is managed by fluid resuscitation,
a fixed-rate insulin infusion to stop ketogenesis,
and vigilant potassium replacement, with treatment of the precipitant — fluids,
insulin and potassium being the cornerstones.
Pull it together: how do you use the antidiabetic drugs rationally,
especially perioperatively?
I would individualise treatment to the diabetes type and the patient,
using insulin replacement for type one and a stepped approach in type two —
metformin first for its efficacy without hypoglycaemia and cardiovascular benefit,
adding agents such as the SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 agonists for their cardiorenal
and weight benefits, the gliptins, sulphonylureas or insulin as needed — aiming to
control glucose while avoiding hypoglycaemia.
Perioperatively I would maintain safe control by manipulating the usual medications
for minor surgery and using a variable-rate insulin infusion for major surgery or
poor control, withholding sulphonylureas on the day,
withholding SGLT2 inhibitors for some days because of euglycaemic ketoacidosis,
and being cautious with metformin in renal impairment and contrast.
I would monitor glucose closely, recognising that hypoglycaemia is masked under
anaesthesia, and be ready to treat ketoacidosis.
So rational use is individualised, hypoglycaemia-aware,
and perioperatively maintains control with medication manipulation or an insulin
infusion, with specific drug cautions.
Describe the mechanism of action of insulin at the cellular level.
Insulin acts through the insulin receptor,
a transmembrane receptor with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity.
When insulin binds, the receptor autophosphorylates and phosphorylates
intracellular substrate proteins, triggering signalling cascades that produce its
effects.
The most important for glucose control is the translocation of glucose transporter
type four to the cell membrane in muscle and fat,
allowing glucose to enter these cells;
insulin also promotes glycogen synthesis in liver and muscle,
suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis,
promotes the storage of fat and inhibits lipolysis,
and stimulates protein synthesis.
So it is fundamentally an anabolic, storage hormone,
lowering glucose by driving its uptake and storage and suppressing its production.
So insulin acts through a tyrosine-kinase receptor that triggers
glucose-transporter translocation and anabolic signalling,
lowering glucose by promoting its uptake into muscle and fat,
stimulating glycogen and fat storage,
and suppressing hepatic glucose output — the anabolic hormone whose deficiency or
resistance causes diabetes.
What are the adverse effects and practical problems of insulin therapy?
Insulin therapy, though essential, has important adverse effects and practical
issues. The principal danger is hypoglycaemia,
from a mismatch of insulin to food or activity,
which can be severe and is masked under anaesthesia.
It causes weight gain through its anabolic effect.
At injection sites, repeated injection causes lipohypertrophy,
lumps of fatty tissue that, if injected into, give erratic absorption,
so sites are rotated.
Errors in insulin prescribing and administration are a recognised source of serious
harm, including confusion of insulin types, units and devices,
so it is a high-alert medication. There can be allergic reactions,
now rare with human and analogue insulins.
Perioperatively, the challenge is matching insulin to altered intake and stress
while avoiding both hyper- and hypoglycaemia.
So insulin's adverse effects are hypoglycaemia,
weight gain and injection-site lipohypertrophy,
and it is a high-alert drug prone to dosing errors,
with the perioperative challenge of matching it to fasting and stress.
Tell me more about the perioperative risk of the GLP-1 agonists and how it is
managed.
The glucagon-like-peptide-one receptor agonists,
now very widely prescribed for diabetes and for weight loss,
pose a specific perioperative hazard because they delay gastric emptying,
so that a patient may have significant retained gastric content despite apparently
adequate fasting, increasing the risk of regurgitation and aspiration on induction.
Emerging guidance recommends considering withholding the drug before elective
surgery — for the long-acting weekly agents potentially for a week or so — and,
where it has not been withheld or where there are symptoms suggesting retained food
such as nausea or fullness, treating the patient as having a full stomach,
considering gastric ultrasound to assess the contents,
and applying aspiration precautions including a rapid-sequence induction.
This is an evolving area as these drugs become ubiquitous.
So the GLP-1 agonists delay gastric emptying and raise aspiration risk,
managed by considering withholding them preoperatively, assessing the stomach,
and applying full-stomach precautions — an increasingly important perioperative
consideration.
Describe the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state and how it differs from ketoacidosis.
The hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state is a hyperglycaemic emergency occurring
typically in older patients with type two diabetes,
characterised by very high blood glucose,
profound dehydration and a markedly raised plasma osmolality,
but without significant ketosis or acidosis,
because the residual insulin in type two diabetes is sufficient to suppress
ketogenesis though not the hyperglycaemia.
It differs from diabetic ketoacidosis, which occurs in insulin-deficient,
usually type one, patients with ketosis and acidosis.
The hyperosmolar state develops more slowly,
with even greater fluid deficits and higher glucose and osmolality,
and carries a high mortality and a risk of thrombosis.
Its management is cautious rehydration as the priority,
given the large deficit and the risk of too-rapid osmolar shifts,
with a lower rate of insulin and careful potassium and osmolality monitoring.
So the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state is severe hyperglycaemia with profound
dehydration but minimal ketosis, differing from ketoacidosis,
managed by cautious rehydration with careful insulin and osmolality control.
Describe the meglitinides and acarbose.
These are less commonly used oral antidiabetic agents with distinct mechanisms.
The meglitinides, such as repaglinide and nateglinide,
are insulin secretagogues that, like the sulphonylureas,
close the beta-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel to stimulate insulin release,
but they have a rapid onset and short duration,
so they are taken with meals to control the postprandial glucose rise,
with a correspondingly shorter-lived hypoglycaemia risk.
Acarbose is an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor that blocks the enzyme in the gut brush
border that breaks down complex carbohydrates,
slowing the absorption of glucose after a meal and blunting the postprandial peak;
it does not cause hypoglycaemia itself but causes flatulence and gastrointestinal
upset from unabsorbed carbohydrate, limiting its use.
So the meglitinides are short-acting mealtime insulin secretagogues,
and acarbose an alpha-glucosidase inhibitor slowing carbohydrate absorption — both
targeting postprandial glucose, the meglitinides with hypoglycaemia risk and
acarbose with gastrointestinal effects.
What are the perioperative glycaemic targets and why does control matter?
Perioperative glycaemic control matters because both hyperglycaemia and
hypoglycaemia cause harm.
Hyperglycaemia impairs immune function and wound healing,
increases the risk of surgical-site and other infection,
causes osmotic diuresis and dehydration, and is associated with worse outcomes;
hypoglycaemia risks neurological injury and is masked under anaesthesia.
The aim is therefore to maintain glucose within a safe target range — commonly
around six to ten, and acceptably up to about twelve,
millimoles per litre — avoiding the extremes,
rather than pursuing tight normoglycaemia,
since attempts at very tight control in the critically ill increased hypoglycaemia
and harm.
Control is achieved by the manipulation of medications or a variable-rate insulin
infusion, with regular monitoring of the capillary or blood glucose throughout the
perioperative period.
So the perioperative target is a safe range around six to ten millimoles per litre,
avoiding the harms of both hyperglycaemia — infection and poor healing — and
hypoglycaemia, rather than tight control,
maintained by medication adjustment and glucose monitoring.
How is the insulin-pump patient managed perioperatively?
The patient using a continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pump requires specific
planning.
For minor surgery with a short fast and a cooperative, well-controlled patient,
the pump may be continued at its basal rate, with close glucose monitoring,
the patient often managing it themselves.
For major surgery, prolonged fasting,
or where the patient cannot manage the device,
the pump is discontinued and replaced by a variable-rate intravenous insulin
infusion, ensuring there is no gap in insulin delivery,
since type one patients develop ketoacidosis rapidly without insulin.
The decision is made in advance with the patient and the diabetes team.
Throughout, glucose is monitored frequently and ketones checked if it rises.
So the insulin-pump patient may continue the pump at basal rate for minor surgery
with monitoring, but for major surgery the pump is replaced by a variable-rate
intravenous insulin infusion with no gap in delivery,
planned in advance with the diabetes team to prevent ketoacidosis.
What is steroid-induced hyperglycaemia and how is it relevant?
Corticosteroids, frequently used perioperatively — as antiemetics,
for airway oedema, or as the patient's regular therapy — raise blood glucose
through their metabolic effects, promoting gluconeogenesis and insulin resistance,
so they can cause significant hyperglycaemia, unmask diabetes,
or worsen control in the established diabetic.
This is relevant in several ways: a single antiemetic dose of dexamethasone causes
a transient rise in glucose that should be anticipated and monitored in the
diabetic patient, though it is not usually a reason to withhold it;
and patients on regular corticosteroids commonly have impaired glucose tolerance
requiring management.
Steroid-induced hyperglycaemia is managed by monitoring and, where needed,
additional glucose-lowering treatment, often insulin,
tailored to the steroid's timing and duration.
So corticosteroids cause hyperglycaemia by promoting gluconeogenesis and insulin
resistance, relevant when dexamethasone is given to the diabetic and when patients
are on regular steroids, managed by glucose monitoring and additional treatment as
required.
What are sick-day rules and why do they matter perioperatively?
Sick-day rules are the guidance given to patients with diabetes on how to manage
their treatment during intercurrent illness,
and the same principles apply around surgery, which is a physiological stress.
The key points are that during illness or stress,
insulin requirements usually rise, not fall,
because of the counter-regulatory stress hormones,
so insulin must not be stopped — a common and dangerous error in unwell type one
patients that precipitates ketoacidosis — and may need increasing;
that glucose and ketones should be monitored more frequently;
that some oral agents, such as metformin and the SGLT2 inhibitors,
are withheld during acute illness because of the risks of lactic acidosis and
euglycaemic ketoacidosis; and that hydration and carbohydrate intake are maintained.
So sick-day rules emphasise not stopping insulin during illness or stress,
increasing monitoring, withholding metformin and SGLT2 inhibitors,
and maintaining hydration — principles directly relevant to safe perioperative
diabetes management.
Give a final integrated account of perioperative diabetes management.
I would approach it by maintaining safe glucose control through the fasting and
stress of surgery while avoiding both hyper- and hypoglycaemia,
individualised to the patient and surgery.
I would assess the diabetes type and control,
schedule diabetic patients early on the list to minimise fasting,
and plan medication management: for minor surgery in the well-controlled patient,
manipulating the usual drugs — omitting sulphonylureas and SGLT2 inhibitors,
adjusting insulin — with glucose monitoring; for major surgery,
prolonged fasting or poor control, a variable-rate intravenous insulin infusion
with substrate, never leaving the type one patient without insulin.
I would withhold metformin where renal impairment or contrast is involved and SGLT2
inhibitors for some days beforehand,
consider the aspiration risk of GLP-1 agonists,
target a glucose around six to ten millimoles per litre,
monitor frequently recognising masked hypoglycaemia,
and be ready to manage ketoacidosis or the hyperosmolar state.
So management is individualised, maintains safe control by medication adjustment or
insulin infusion, and applies the specific drug cautions.
Describe the counter-regulatory response to hypoglycaemia.
When blood glucose falls, the body mounts a counter-regulatory response to restore
it, opposing the action of insulin,
and understanding it explains both the symptoms of hypoglycaemia and the danger of
its loss.
As glucose falls, insulin secretion is first suppressed; then glucagon is released,
stimulating hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis to raise glucose,
the first and most important defence; and the sympathoadrenal system is activated,
releasing adrenaline, which raises glucose and produces the autonomic warning
symptoms of sweating, tremor and palpitations.
With more prolonged or severe hypoglycaemia,
cortisol and growth hormone contribute. These hormones together restore the glucose
and, through the sympathetic response, warn the patient.
In long-standing diabetes these responses can fail.
So the counter-regulatory response to hypoglycaemia is the suppression of insulin
and the release of glucagon, adrenaline, and later cortisol and growth hormone,
which restore glucose and generate the autonomic warning symptoms — a defence whose
failure underlies hypoglycaemia unawareness.
What is hypoglycaemia unawareness and why does it matter perioperatively?
Hypoglycaemia unawareness is the loss of the early warning symptoms of
hypoglycaemia, so that the patient does not recognise a falling glucose until they
are severely affected, with neuroglycopenia and a reduced conscious level.
It develops in long-standing diabetes through autonomic neuropathy and through the
blunting of the counter-regulatory and sympathoadrenal responses by recurrent
hypoglycaemia, and it is worsened by beta-blockers,
which mask the adrenergic symptoms.
It matters greatly because it removes the safety warning,
increasing the risk of severe, unrecognised hypoglycaemia.
Perioperatively this is compounded because anaesthesia and sedation themselves
abolish the recognition and the symptoms of hypoglycaemia,
so a dangerously low glucose can go entirely unnoticed.
The safeguard is regular, frequent glucose monitoring rather than reliance on
symptoms.
So hypoglycaemia unawareness is the loss of warning symptoms from autonomic failure
and recurrent hypoglycaemia, dangerous because it removes the alert to a falling
glucose, and perioperatively critical because anaesthesia further masks
hypoglycaemia — mandating regular glucose monitoring.
Detail metformin-associated lactic acidosis.
Metformin-associated lactic acidosis is the rare but serious adverse effect that
governs the cautions around the drug.
Metformin promotes the conversion of glucose to lactate in the gut and inhibits
hepatic gluconeogenesis, part of which uses lactate; when the drug accumulates,
or when lactate production rises or its clearance falls,
lactate can accumulate to cause a metabolic acidosis, which has a high mortality.
The risk is greatest where the drug accumulates, as in renal impairment,
and in conditions of tissue hypoxia and increased lactate — cardiac or respiratory
failure, sepsis, shock, dehydration and major surgery — and with the use of
iodinated contrast, which may impair renal function.
This is why metformin is contraindicated in significant renal impairment and
withheld around contrast and acute illness.
So metformin-associated lactic acidosis arises when the drug accumulates or lactate
handling is impaired, in renal impairment, tissue hypoxia,
sepsis and around contrast, a rare but high-mortality complication that dictates
withholding metformin in these situations — a key perioperative caution.
Compare the insulin types and their practical handling.
Insulins are compared by their pharmacokinetic profile,
which determines their role and handling.
The rapid-acting analogues — aspart, lispro,
glulisine — begin within ten to twenty minutes, peak early and last a few hours,
given with meals; soluble insulin is similar but slower,
used as mealtime cover and intravenously.
The intermediate isophane insulin and the long-acting analogues — glargine and
detemir lasting around a day, and degludec longer with a flat profile — provide
basal cover. Premixed insulins combine the two.
Practically, insulin is stored refrigerated until in use and then kept at room
temperature for a limited period, protected from extremes of temperature that
denature it; it is given subcutaneously with site rotation to avoid
lipohypertrophy; and it is a high-alert medication where the type,
the strength and the units must be checked to avoid serious dosing errors.
So insulins range from rapid mealtime analogues through soluble insulin to
intermediate and long-acting basal insulins and premixed forms,
requiring careful storage, site rotation and meticulous checking as a high-alert
drug — their profiles dictating their use.
How does diabetes affect the patient beyond glucose — the complications relevant to
anaesthesia?
Diabetes causes chronic micro- and macrovascular complications that have important
anaesthetic implications beyond glucose control.
Macrovascular disease brings a high burden of often silent ischaemic heart disease,
cerebrovascular and peripheral vascular disease,
raising perioperative cardiovascular risk.
Microvascular disease causes nephropathy,
with renal impairment affecting drug handling and fluid management; retinopathy;
and neuropathy.
Autonomic neuropathy is particularly relevant,
causing cardiovascular instability with impaired compensatory responses,
gastroparesis with delayed gastric emptying and aspiration risk,
and hypoglycaemia unawareness.
There may be stiff-joint syndrome with limited neck and jaw movement,
predicting difficult intubation. Infection risk is increased.
So I would assess these in the diabetic patient.
So diabetes brings cardiovascular disease raising perioperative risk,
nephropathy affecting drugs and fluids, autonomic neuropathy causing instability,
gastroparesis and hypoglycaemia unawareness,
possible difficult intubation from stiff joints,
and increased infection risk — complications that shape the whole anaesthetic,
not just glucose management.
How is gestational diabetes and the diabetic parturient managed?
Diabetes in pregnancy — pre-existing or gestational,
the latter arising from the insulin resistance of pregnancy — requires tight
glucose control to reduce fetal and maternal complications,
and has specific peripartum management.
Control is by diet, metformin and insulin,
with insulin requirements rising through pregnancy and then falling abruptly after
delivery of the placenta.
During labour and caesarean section, glucose is controlled,
often with a variable-rate insulin infusion with substrate for those on insulin,
targeting a normal range to reduce neonatal hypoglycaemia,
with frequent monitoring; insulin requirements drop sharply postpartum,
so infusions are reduced to avoid hypoglycaemia.
The neonate is monitored for hypoglycaemia.
Regional analgesia and anaesthesia are generally favourable.
So diabetes in pregnancy demands tight control with diet, metformin and insulin,
with rising antenatal and abruptly falling postpartum requirements,
managed peripartum with glucose control often by insulin infusion and careful
postpartum reduction, and monitoring of the neonate — a distinct context requiring
close glucose management around delivery.
What is the perioperative significance of diabetic autonomic neuropathy?
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy is particularly significant perioperatively because
it impairs the cardiovascular and gastrointestinal reflexes that the anaesthetised
patient relies upon.
Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy blunts the compensatory tachycardia and
vasoconstriction to hypovolaemia and to the vasodilatation of anaesthesia,
so these patients are prone to marked haemodynamic instability and hypotension,
with a resting tachycardia and a loss of beat-to-beat variability,
and an increased risk of silent ischaemia and of sudden cardiac events.
Gastrointestinal involvement causes gastroparesis,
delaying gastric emptying and increasing the aspiration risk,
warranting aspiration precautions. It contributes to hypoglycaemia unawareness and
to impaired thermoregulation.
The implications are to anticipate haemodynamic instability,
manage volume carefully, treat aspiration risk, and monitor closely.
So diabetic autonomic neuropathy impairs cardiovascular compensation — causing
instability, hypotension and silent ischaemia — delays gastric emptying with
aspiration risk, and worsens hypoglycaemia unawareness,
all requiring anticipation and vigilance in the diabetic patient.
Distinguish the perioperative approach to type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
The two types differ in a way that critically affects perioperative management.
The type one patient has an absolute insulin deficiency and is wholly dependent on
exogenous insulin, so insulin must never be omitted entirely — even when fasting,
a basal insulin or an intravenous infusion must continue,
because without insulin the patient rapidly develops ketoacidosis.
The type two patient has residual insulin and insulin resistance,
so is less prone to ketoacidosis when insulin is reduced and may be managed by
manipulating oral agents and reduced insulin for minor surgery.
Both require avoidance of hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia and glucose monitoring,
and both may need a variable-rate insulin infusion for major surgery,
but the type one patient's absolute insulin dependence is the key distinction,
with the SGLT2-inhibitor euglycaemic-ketoacidosis risk relevant in type two.
So the perioperative approach differs in that the type one patient must always
receive insulin to prevent ketoacidosis, whereas the type two patient,
with residual insulin, may be managed by medication adjustment for minor surgery —
absolute insulin dependence being the cardinal distinction.
Why does surgical stress cause hyperglycaemia?
Surgery provokes hyperglycaemia through the neuroendocrine stress response,
even in the non-diabetic, and more markedly in the diabetic.
The tissue injury and the associated pain and anxiety activate the sympathetic
nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
releasing the counter-regulatory hormones — cortisol, adrenaline,
glucagon and growth hormone.
These raise blood glucose by stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis
and by inducing insulin resistance in the peripheral tissues,
so that glucose rises despite available insulin.
The inflammatory cytokines released by surgery further increase insulin resistance.
The result is a tendency to hyperglycaemia that must be anticipated and controlled
perioperatively, and which can be attenuated by good analgesia,
regional anaesthesia and the avoidance of excessive fasting.
So surgical stress causes hyperglycaemia through the release of counter-regulatory
hormones and inflammatory cytokines,
which stimulate hepatic glucose production and induce insulin resistance,
a response anticipated in perioperative glucose management and lessened by good
analgesia and regional techniques.
Summarise the key perioperative pitfalls in diabetes management.
Drawing the pitfalls together: the first is omitting insulin in the type one
patient when fasting, which precipitates ketoacidosis — insulin must always
continue.
The second is unrecognised hypoglycaemia,
masked by anaesthesia and by hypoglycaemia unawareness,
avoided only by regular glucose monitoring rather than reliance on symptoms.
The third is failing to withhold the drugs with specific perioperative hazards —
the SGLT2 inhibitors, risking euglycaemic ketoacidosis,
and metformin where renal impairment or contrast risks lactic acidosis.
The fourth is neglecting the aspiration risk of gastroparesis and of GLP-1
agonists. The fifth is over-tight control causing hypoglycaemia,
when a safe moderate target is intended. The sixth is overlooking the wider
complications — cardiovascular, renal, autonomic and airway.
So the key pitfalls are omitting insulin in type one diabetes,
missing masked hypoglycaemia, failing to withhold SGLT2 inhibitors and metformin
appropriately, neglecting aspiration risk, over-tight control,
and overlooking the systemic complications — each avoided by anticipation,
monitoring and the appropriate medication plan.
How is diabetes diagnosed, and what is the role of glycated haemoglobin?
Diabetes is diagnosed by demonstrating chronic hyperglycaemia,
using defined thresholds.
The criteria include a fasting plasma glucose at or above seven millimoles per
litre, a random or two-hour post-glucose-load value at or above eleven point one,
or a glycated haemoglobin at or above forty-eight millimoles per mole,
with a confirmatory test in the asymptomatic.
Glycated haemoglobin, or HbA1c, reflects the average glucose over the preceding two
to three months, the lifespan of the red cell,
because glucose binds irreversibly to haemoglobin in proportion to its
concentration; it is therefore valuable both for diagnosis and for monitoring
long-term control, unaffected by short-term fluctuations.
It is unreliable where red-cell turnover is altered, as in anaemia,
haemoglobinopathy or pregnancy. Perioperatively,
it indicates the adequacy of recent control and the patient's risk.
So diabetes is diagnosed by glucose thresholds or a glycated haemoglobin at or
above forty-eight millimoles per mole,
the latter reflecting average glucose over two to three months,
used for diagnosis and monitoring and indicating perioperative risk,
with caveats where red-cell turnover is abnormal.
What is the cardiovascular and renal outcome evidence shaping modern drug choice?
The choice of antidiabetic drugs has been transformed by large cardiovascular and
renal outcome trials, so that selection is now driven not only by glucose lowering
but by these outcome benefits.
The SGLT2 inhibitors have been shown to reduce cardiovascular events,
hospitalisation for heart failure, and the progression of chronic kidney disease,
with benefits extending even to non-diabetic patients with heart failure or kidney
disease, making them a priority in diabetic patients with these conditions.
Several GLP-1 receptor agonists have been shown to reduce cardiovascular events and
to produce substantial weight loss. Metformin retains its place as first-line for
its efficacy, safety and probable cardiovascular benefit.
By contrast, some older agents are glucose-lowering without such outcome benefit.
So modern drug choice is shaped by outcome evidence — the cardiorenal benefits of
the SGLT2 inhibitors and the cardiovascular and weight benefits of the GLP-1
agonists — so these are favoured in patients with cardiovascular or renal disease,
alongside metformin, reflecting a shift from glucose-centred to outcome-centred
prescribing.
Summarise the place of the antidiabetic drugs in a coherent treatment hierarchy.
I would place the antidiabetic drugs in a coherent hierarchy driven by the diabetes
type, glucose control and comorbidity. In type one diabetes,
insulin replacement is essential and lifelong, in a basal-bolus regimen or by pump.
In type two diabetes, treatment is stepped: lifestyle measures throughout;
metformin as first-line for its efficacy, safety and cardiovascular benefit;
then the addition of agents chosen increasingly for their outcome benefits — an
SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 agonist where there is cardiovascular or renal disease or
a need for weight loss — with the gliptins,
sulphonylureas or pioglitazone as further options,
and insulin added when these are insufficient.
Throughout, the aims are to control glucose to prevent complications while avoiding
hypoglycaemia, and perioperatively to maintain safe control.
So the hierarchy is insulin for type one,
and for type two a stepped approach from lifestyle and metformin to outcome-driven
agents and ultimately insulin — individualised to control,
comorbidity and the avoidance of hypoglycaemia.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Glucose is regulated by insulin (lowers) and glucagon (raises);
type 1 needs insulin replacement, type 2 is treated with agents improving
sensitivity or secretion then insulin,
aiming to control glucose while avoiding hypoglycaemia — perioperatively,
safe control through fasting and stress.
Second, Insulin preparations span rapid (aspart/lispro), short (soluble),
intermediate (isophane/NPH) and long-acting analogues (glargine/detemir/degludec);
metformin (biguanide) reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis without hypoglycaemia but
risks lactic acidosis in renal impairment/contrast;
sulphonylureas close the beta-cell K-ATP channel to release insulin,
causing hypoglycaemia and weight gain.
Third, Incretin therapies: DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) prolong incretin action;
GLP-1 agonists (semaglutide) give weight loss and cardiovascular benefit but delay
gastric emptying (aspiration risk).
SGLT2 inhibitors (gliflozins) cause glycosuric lowering with cardiorenal benefit
but euglycaemic DKA (withhold before surgery);
thiazolidinediones (pioglitazone) cause fluid retention/heart-failure risk.
Fourth, Perioperatively: manipulate usual drugs for minor surgery (omit
sulphonylureas and SGLT2 inhibitors, continue/reduce others);
use a variable-rate insulin infusion for major surgery or poor control;
continue metformin for short procedures but withhold with renal
impairment/contrast; monitor glucose (hypoglycaemia is masked under anaesthesia).
5.
Hypoglycaemia (<~4 mmol/L) gives autonomic then neuroglycopenic features,
masked under anaesthesia — treat promptly with glucose (IV or IM glucagon if no
oral route); diabetic ketoacidosis is managed by fluids,
a fixed-rate insulin infusion to stop ketogenesis,
and vigilant potassium replacement, treating the precipitant.
Thank you. That concludes the station.